All right so here we have for example and it says find the intervals of concavity and point of inflection
for f of x equals x cubed over to minus 3 x squared.
All right.
So we want to find concavity.
We know that we need to use the second derivative because concavity is found with the second derivative.
And remember the process is pretty much the same as the one for intervals of increase and decrease just
that we're going to use the second derivative instead of the first.
So the first thing we're going to do
is to find the second derivative.
So we're going to find
double prime of x.
This is double prime by the way.
All right.
So let's go ahead and find that out.
So to do that we first find the first derivative.
So prime of X and we're just going to go ahead and start.
So for the first term we have a power function but we're dividing by two.
So remember that if we're dividing by two that's like multiplying by one half.
So it's just the constant 1 1/2 multiplying.
So we use the constant multiple rule.
We put it outside.
And then what we do is remember we bring down a dictator.
So we have a three X and we subtract one from the exponent.
So that's a two and I'll put it as three minus 1.
So we can see the whole process minus again and we have a constant three.
So we leave it outside and we bring down this two multiplying times 2 x to the two.
Mine is one.
So that's equal to.
So we have 1 1/2 times 3.
So that's three over two.
Remember that when we multiply fractions we have top Times top and bottom times bottom.
So it's 1 times 3 on the top and two times the bottom here is one.
All right so if it's not marked It's always one or two times one is two.
And then we have access to the two.
That's the three minus one x squared.
Mine is three times 2 is 6 x 2 the ones the just 6 x.
All right.
So we have our first derivative Let's find our second derivative.
So remember the second derivative is just a derivative of the first derivative.
So we take the derivative of this function here.
So first of all we have the three over two as a constant multiplying.
So we put it outside.
We bring down this too.
So we bring down a dictator in power that's 2 x to 1.
Right because we subtract one from the exponent.
So that's just x to the one minus.
Again we have this constant outside's that we put it when we have the derivative of x.
Remember that's the derivative of X to 1 and 1 minus 1 and the exponent is 0.
So X to the 0 is just one.
In other words this 6 x when you take the derivative becomes only 6 because a derivative of this X is
just 1 and we'll simplify.
So what do we have.
We have 3 over 2 times 2.
So we have a 2 on the top and a two on the bottom.
So we can cancel out the twos and we have 3 X minus 6.
All right so there we have our second derivative 3 X minus 6.
Our next step is remember to find the numbers that make the second derivative either equal to zero or
undefined.
But again this function cannot be undefined because there cannot be any division by zero.
Therefore we're just going to say that it equals zero so step 2 is finite.
When the second derivative of double prime X equals zero.
So we're going to say double prime of x which is 3 x minus 6
is equal to zero.
All right.
And to solve this we're just going to add six from both sides because we want to solve for x and actually
let's bring it up here to this continues right here.
Actually let's do it over here.
And we have three X minus six equals zero.
So we had sex on both sides plus six plus six so this cancels out and we have 3 x equals 6 and we divide
by 3 right.
Because we have three acts and we want to find X so we have to divide
over three and X equals two.
So let me put it as a separate thing right here.
All right.
So this is us solving for a number that makes the second derivative equals zero.
And that number is X equals 2.
All right great.
So now that we have the number that makes a second derivative equals zero.
Now we need to find and test values to the left and to the right of that 0.
So in other words what we do is we classify
the intervals
of concavity remember how we classified relative extrema.
So we had to find out whether we had relative Max or relative ments.
This is pretty much the same thing.
So remember that we had this number line right and then this number line back when we were doing the
relative extrema we needed to find the numbers that made the first derivative either equal to zero or
undefined and then plug them in here.
However in this case we found the numbers that make the second derivative instead of the first equal
to zero.
And remember we don't have any numbers for it to be undefined because there is no fraction.
And this case is very easy.
There's only one number and that's two remember.
We have to pick a value to the left of the two.
And to the right.
Let's pick easy numbers.
So let's pick zero to the left.
So that is our first test value.
And let's pick 10 to the right.
That is our second test value.
And remember these go into the second derivative.
All right.
If you plug them into the regular function you're just going to get the y value of the graph.
And if you plug them into the first derivative then you're just going to be finding relative extrema.
Remember that to find concavity you need to plug into the second derivative.
So let's go ahead and plug it to 0 and 10 into the second derivative and let's go ahead and divide this
over here.
So we know it's different.
All right.
So we'll do half double prime of zero so we're plugging in zero into the second derivative.
So the second derivatives are here.
It's going to give us three times 0
minus six or 3 times 0 0 and we have negative six.
So it's a negative number.
That means that to the left of the two we have negative.
All right.
And let's plug it in our second test value.
So we have the prime of 10.
And again we're plugging that in into our second derivative right here so three times 10
minus six that's going to give us 30 minus 6 which is 24.
So it is a positive number.
That means that to the right of the two we have positives.
All right.
And remember our rules for concavity.
They say that if the second derivative is negative then a graph is concave down.
However if it's positive it's concave up.
So we can find or intervals of concavity with this to the left of the two we have negative.
So the graph is concave down.
In other words from negative infinity up to two
the graph is concave down
and starting from two and to the right of two the second derivative is positive.
Therefore the graph is concave up.
So from two to positive infinity in this interval the graph is concave up.
These are intervals of concavity.
All right.
So again we determine whether the graph is concave up or down based on the sign given by these test
values.
That too is the value in the middle.
So the two makes the second derivative equals zero.
And we tested to the left of that two to the right.
If we had had more numbers than two.
So for example if we had had two one for that we should have tested to the left to between two and four.
And then to the right of 4 but because we only had to just try one value to the left and one value to
the right perfect.
So let me ask you a question.
Is there a point of inflection when X equals to.
Well remember that a point of inflection is a point where the concavity of a graph changes as a concavity
changing as you go from the left up to to the right of two.
You bet and how do we know this well actually or intervals say so from negative infinity to it's concave
down but from two to positive infinity it's concave up.
And in fact if you look at the signs you'll know right away.
Right.
You go from negative two positive the moment you cross two you're going into the positive second derivative.
But if you go to the left of two you have the negative second derivative.
So there is a point of inflection when X equals two.
Let's find the corresponding y value of that point of inflection.
Now the million dollar question is where do we plug this to to get the y value of the point of inflection
what do you think.
Do you plug it into the second derivative.
Well remember if you do you're going to get zero.
I'm not saying that to zero.
Could it be the points.
But however remember that we just found too because it makes that second derivative equal to zero.
So it doesn't make sense.
You plug it in there.
Remember that we're looking for the point of inflection of the original function.
Right so if we're finding the point of inflection of the original function it makes sense that you would
plug it in here into the original in the same way that to find the y values of relative maximun relative
minima you plug the x values into the original.
Remember that all of this we're finding the intervals of concavity.
The point of inflection the relative extrema intervals of increase and decrease.
We're always finding all of those things for this function right here.
The first and second derivative are just tools that we use to find out stuff about this function.
That is why we plug in this to into the original function to get the y value of this point of inflection
right.
So I'll summarize it here as IP inflection point.
You can write it yourself the whole word.
I just need to save some space.
So let's find the y value of this point of inflection.
So we're going to plug in to which is where our second derivative changes from negative to positive
into the original.
So we're going to plug it in right here.
So we have two cubed over to minus
three times two squared.
All right.
So I'll just read the results because we don't have a lot of space.
So we have two to the three it's two times to attempt to is eight eight over two is four.
All right so we have four on this side minus two squared is four times three is 12.
So we have for minus 12 is negative 8 is negative 8 is the output that we get when we plug into into
the original function.
Therefore we have a point of inflection adds to the x value and negative 8 the y value.
This is where our point of inflection is.
All right.
So this is it.
We have intervals of concavity right here that is the first part of our answer.
Oh man I feel like I'm going through a maze here.
All right there we go.
OK.
So was there.
Got it.
Again this is our intervals of concavity and this is the point of inflection.
Member a point always has an X and Y value.
So that's why we plugged in this to into the original.
So again a quick summary.
We wanted to find the entrails of concavity and point of inflection for this function.
So the first step because we're dealing with concavity we need to find the second derivative.
So we found the first derivative and then we found the derivative of that.
That gave us 3 X minus 6.
Then we went ahead and found the numbers that make this derivative equal to zero.
It can never be undefined because there's no fraction.
So we just find the numbers that make it equal to zero.
We find this too by solving for x.
And after we have this too we classify the intervals of concavity.
So we need to find if there are concave up or concave down.
So we draw this number line and we have the two.
So we have to test one value to the left and one value to the right.
We picked zero and 10 and the 0 gave us a negative answer and the turn gave us a positive answer.
So to the left of the two where the 0 is that's negative and to the right of the two where the 10 is
positive.
So again paysan this we know that to the left of two because it's negative the gravest concave down
on the other hand to the right of two because it's positive.
The graph is concave up.
This gave us are intervals of concavity.
And finally we determined that there is in fact an inflection point because remember an inflection point
is a point where the graph changes concavity because it goes from concave down to concave up.
Then we know there's a point of inflection when X equals two.
And to find the corresponding y value for that to remember we plug in into the original because we're
finding the point of inflection of this function.
After all that gave us negative 8 and finally our point of inflection is at too negative 8.
This is the point where the graph goes from concave down to concave up.